---
permalink: /
title: "Welcome page"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

Thank you for dropping by. My name is Jacobo, and I am an economist and sociologist currently working on distributional and environmental applications of input-output models for the study of climate change in the Department of Land Morphology at the [Technical University of Madrid](https://portalcientifico.upm.es/es/ipublic/researcher/336709). I hold a PhD in economics from The New School for Social Research in New York and am a PhD candidate in civil systems engineering at the Technical University of Madrid. My research touches on various topics, from political economy to climate change, but is fundamentally driven by my interest in studying the relationship between structural change and the living standards of the majority of the population. Methodologically, I favor input-output analysis, Bayesian econometrics, and household surveys. I have a passion for the classics of political economy, the system of national accounts, and the R programming language.

My professional background includes teaching and consultancy, though most of my experience has been in programming-intensive roles that involve working with diverse datasets for policy-oriented analysis. I have previously worked as a PhD trainee within the Distributional Wealth Accounts team in the Sector Accounts and Fiscal Statistics Section of the European Central Bank, as well as at the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) producing flash multidimensional vulnerability/poverty indices for LDCs during the Covid-19 pandemic. During my PhD at The New School, I taught several courses, including graduate econometrics as a teaching assistant and the political economy of populism as a teaching fellow. My ideal job would combine applied research and the production of experimental statistics with opportunities to communicate results and engage in hands-on data work.

At present, my main area of research focuses on analyzing the dimensions, determinants, and economic and social impacts of climate change on living standards. I am particularly interested in the connections between decarbonization policy, relative price shocks, and essential consumption. Currently, I am pursuing three main lines of applied work:

  * **Climate change and decarbonization constraints**. Together with Sergio Alvarez, I produced the most accurate and detailed carbon footprint estimation for the city of Madrid, which we recently submitted for peer review. We are currently working on a paper that includes a structural decomposition of the factors driving emissions growth at the country and sector levels, aiming to identify international constraints on decarbonization within the context of global supply chain reconfiguration. Following this paper, we plan to focus on decarbonization possibilities by examining distributional carbon gaps, specifically contrasting the city of Madrid, the region of Madrid, and the rest of Spain.
  * **Distributional input-output models** applied to environmental and inflation research. This line of work leverages the current developments of distributional national accounts to integrate the input-output framework with wealth, income, and consumption surveys. This includes statistical matching of the different household surveys and developing criteria to produce the vertical linkage of micro and macro states. At the moment, I have produced the first batch of results focusing on the effect of interindustry price shocks on the CPI through the household expenditure feedback channel; these have been presented at two conferences in 2024. The purpose is to contribute to the recent literature on inflation inequality and supply shocks. Once this first paper is sent for review, I plan to use the methodology to study "greenflation" and its possible effect on living standards.
  * **Statistical regularities in production structures**. Together with Luis Daniel Torres-González (UNAM), I am studying key stylized facts of production networks at national and global levels, focusing particularly on the relationship between distribution and technical variables. We have published some results on the characterization of quasi-linear price curves in *Contributions to Political Economy* and are currently drafting a paper on the profit-wage curve. After characterizing the linearity of price and profit-wage curves in real economies, we plan to investigate the underlying causes of these persistent statistical regularities.
